[Music]
well hello everybody and welcome to my
february 2021 planetarium show
we've got the sky set to the 3rd of
february at
uh just before 5 o'clock we're letting
time run forward towards sunset now
so this gun sun will begin to set and
the sky is going to darken
the first stars are going to start
appearing here they come
and we've chosen to stop at this point
because there's a pass by the
international space station
and so if we look over to the west here
is the iss
rising up quite rapidly across the sky
one or two other satellites there it
seems to be
racing another little tiny one there
look that's starlink 104
but the iss was launched in 1998 and
it's 260
miles above the earth's surface doing 17
100 miles an hour amazing for a 400 ton
spacecraft
it has the dragon module attached to it
from spacex
which recently delivered some astronauts
up there
and now it's that was a near-miss with a
russian rocket
um not really it was a different
distance but it's beginning to descend
down towards the horizon going to vanish
any moment
there it goes it winks out as it enters
the shadow of the earth
just before it reaches the horizon in
fact that very suddenly disappears
quite astonishing when you watch it but
we will now begin
the sky tour over at the west
and we'll pull back a little bit and let
you see the constellation that's the
first one
on our tour and that is the
constellation of aquarius the water
carrier
there's the water carrier pouring his
water from his jug
i have chosen to start here because
aquarius is one of the constellations of
the zodiac
and the zodiac constellations there are
13 of them in total
are the realm of the planets the planets
all
orbit around the sun in a flat plain and
so we see them
on a line in the sky called the ecliptic
that's the orange line that you see
there
so if we zoom in a little bit onto
aquarius and just go
south of the lion here here is neptune
almost
perfectly aligned neptune the outermost
of the major planets
seen as a blue disc with a small
telescope
and you need a very powerful telescope
to get a view like this
we can see some of its moons marked
there these are mostly little tiny
moonlets that were discovered
first of all by the voyager spacecraft
you can also see a little tiny sets of
rings there
all the giant planets have rings not
just saturn
but saturn's are by far the most
spectacular
so these very very thin rings they were
initially found looking back
through them towards the sun by the
voyager spacecraft
it has a very large moon called triton
which has been orbited the sun we would
call a planet it's about the same size
as the planet mercury
but it orbits neptune except it does it
backwards
and you can see the surface markings
there those
dark black bits are liquid nitrogen
geysers bringing dirty material
up from the subsurface quite amazing
so we'll pull back away from triton and
neptune now
and we're going to look a little bit
further along the line of the ecliptic
through the next constellation which is
pisces the fish
there it is just a little higher than
aquarius
there's the fish with their tails
seemingly tied together
with a bit of seaweed it's really just
two lines of stars across the sky of
course
so that's the constellation of pisces
the next one in the parade
of the constellations of the zodiac
we're going to continue on
just to the higher into the sky here and
we'll find
a small constellation aries the third
one along
in terms of the constellations of the
zodiac
it's really just a little lawyer of
stars but ancient people imagined that
this
drew out the shape of a goat so there's
ares the goat
and its feet just touching that orange
line that marks the path of the planets
and of course we can see one of those
planets there the third one of our
planetary
parade for this month and that is the
red planet mars you can already see it's
just as the red
orange disc there so we're now going to
zoom in
uh first of all we're going to zoom in
on uranus and
this looks a little bit like neptune
except greener
here it is this paint green disc and a
array of
moons that you can see with an amateur
telescope
miranda ariel oberon umbrial and titania
all discovered shortly after uranus was
found itself by william herschel
if we zoom right in on the planet we can
just see some faint cloud belts
running around it and it also has a set
of rings as i said more impressive than
neptune's but nowhere near those of
the rings of saturn of course again this
was all discovered by the voyager probe
it was the first
to fly out into the delts of the outer
solar system
let's have a look at one of its moons
its largest and that's titania
and this is 980 miles in diameter so
about half the size of the earth's moon
covered in craters but those craters
seem to be soft because they've landed
in an
ice layer underneath which there is a
liquid water ocean
and that's a possible habitat for some
form of life
we don't know whether there's anything
there but it's worth exploring when we
get the chance
so we'll pull back away from uranus and
zip next door
to the third planet on our list and
that's mars and we can now zoom right in
on mars
we can already see phobos and dmos the
two moons of mars there
and some of the detailed markings on the
surface
in the upper region there are three dots
in a line those are the
fastest volcanoes of the uh amazing
volcanic region of mars
i'll point at them for you here these
three
and this one is the largest the fourth
one that's olympus mons the largest
volcano in the solar system
and here is malice marinaris the martian
grand canyon
the distance from one end to the other
would go all the way from new york to
san francisco it's absolutely enormous
so we'll pull back away from mars the
red planet
and get a nice wide view of the sky and
now what we're going to let
happen is we're going to let time run
forward to nine o'clock
just so that we get to the fully dark
state of the sky we're going to let the
constellations of the
winter taurus and orion there
move into a better position so we'll
bring those across
we'll head towards nine
you can already see quite a collection
of bright stars there we're going to
visit most of those
so let's start with taurus taurus the
bull
so we can see the v shape there that
makes up the face of the ball with the
two enormous horns
sticking up to the top there let's have
the artwork
to show you how that works the back half
of the ball is missing you know
kind of butts into uh aries around there
another of the constellations the zodiac
but there are no planets in
this at the moment
the bright orange star that's the uh
left hand one of that triangle is
aldebaran but here we have the pleiades
the seven sisters
a cluster of young hot blue stars
visible to the naked eye backed by
thousands of
small fainter ones you can see white
ones and then the really faint yellowy
orange ones are like the sun
the bright ones are much more powerful
you can even see some of the gas left
over from the star formation process
there
that's about 440 light years away from
the earth
there's a 150 million years old since
the
starts were formed so they're very young
indeed
here is the remains of an exploded star
over by the
horns of the bull this is the crab
nebula
was spotted by chinese astronomers as a
new star that appeared in the sky for
three months
in the year 1054 a.d but nowadays we see
the remnant of that explosion that
brightened up became visible even in
daylight to the chinese astronomers
for fading away
now we're going to look at perhaps my
favorite constellation of all and that
is the constellation of
orion perfectly placed at this time
we see orion's belt there the three
stars then a neat line across the middle
there it is lined up with the artwork
and you see the other four corner stars
marking his knees and
his shoulders
we'll have a look at the top left-hand
corner star that's betelgeuse
very red in color it's a red giant star
and it's due to explode
as a supernova sometime very soon in the
next million years
or so that's soon for astronomers and
actually last year it began misbehaving
and we thought maybe it was about to
uh explode but it settled down again now
and it suddenly became very dim
so that's betelgeuse the supergiant red
star there at the end of its life
up in the left hand corner of orion the
other end of things
is where new stars are being born and
that's the orion nebula one of the most
beautiful objects in the sky
actually you can see all these wispy uh
gas glowing in different colors you see
dirty dusty
dust lanes swirling around in front of
the
brighter regions behind new stars have
been born in the center here by the
collapse under gravity of all of that
material
and they have lit up and it's their
strong light that's causing that nebula
that
thin cloud of gas and dust to glow in
such a beautiful manner
the whole of orion is full of these
sorts of uh
regions we're going to look at the
left-hand belt star
of the three there own attack and you
can already see that there's something
going on nearby
we'll zoom right in on it now
and you can see there the horse head
nebula the dark
dusty region looks a bit more like a
seahorse his head on its side
in front of that red glowing hydrogen
gas it's all being lit up by the
powerful light
of the bright star at the top of the
screen there
to the left of that is the flame nebula
you can see why it's called that it's
got the shape of a flame
very beautiful indeed
so we'll now just move along to the next
object on the tour of orion and that's a
different type of nebula again
new stars have been formed out of
collapsing gas here
but the blue color is the striking
feature here
there's a very hot blue star hiding
behind the dirty
regions there the dirty dusty finger
that's blocking
our view of it and the blue light is
bouncing back to us off the gas behind
you also see just that red streak across
the sky
that's called barnard's loop orion is
just full of these enormous
clouds of dirty dusty material
down to the foot of orion we have one of
his hunting dogs
canis major you can just about make out
the outline of the dog now the stix
diagram is on the screen there's the dog
and you just see the feet of orion up to
the top right there
we can see the bright star sirius it's
the brightest star apart from our sun
that we can see and it's bright because
it's nearby it is a little bigger than
the sun a little bit more powerful but
not much
um but it's only 8.6 light years away
from us
and that's why it's seen as such a
bright star
other bright stars are much further away
and yet
vastly more powerful some of them are a
hundred thousand times
the power output of the sun and we see
them at
thousands of light years away because of
that
so that's serious the dog star and
orion has two dogs he has cannons major
we've already seen and now canis minor
which really is just two stars linked by
a stick there
i think they were pushing their luck
when they invented the second dog
but there he is the little dog and it
has another bright star in it called
procyon
procyon is very very similar to sirius
in mass in temperature all of those
characteristics
it's just that it's 11 and a half light
years away and so it seems
that it's uh much dimmer because of the
extra distance
but it's almost the twin of sirius in
fact both
sirius and pro-scion are double stars
and they each have
a little companion called a white dwarf
orbiting around them that we can't
easily see
unless we have a powerful telescope
those were the two hunting dogs
and between the two of them is a
constellation that contains almost no
bright stars at all
the constellation of monoceros there's
the stick diagram linking up a group of
relatively faint stars as you can see
but monoceros
is a unicorn so orion is going hunting
and he's got two dogs and a unicorn with
him
very wise now
picked a look at this constellation
because it has one of the most beautiful
objects in the sky the rosette nebula
this is a star-forming region that's a
little bit in between that of the orion
nebula that's just given birth to stars
and apply the star cluster that we've
already seen
here you can see the cluster of bright
stars
emerging from what looks like a bubble
in the center of that
cloud of gas it's called the rosette now
you can see
why because it does look like a rose but
those stars have blown
that bubble with their strong radiation
and
you can just see they're blowing away
the rest of the gas
that was part of their formation
we also have here the christmas tree
cluster now as with a lot of things in
astronomy it's upside down so the tip of
the christmas tree is here
and the base is here and these stars are
supposed to make
the shape of the christmas tree here's
the hubble space telescope view that
i've brought in for you
you can see the cone nebula at the
bottom here
like this this cone of material you can
see it's in color there in the uh
low resolution view so that's the cone
nebula and if you have
a pair of binoculars both of those are
well worth trying to find
you can navigate to them by finding
betelgeuse in orion
and then traveling to the uh east
so left across the sky as we're looking
at it
there's battle just there you see just
come this way
at the halfway between betelgeuse and
pro scion just about in this region here
so there we have some excellent objects
to go looking for in the sky
now i've turned on the rest of the
constellations for you we have
gemini here the next constellation along
in the uh
sequence of the constellations of the
zodiac
we look a bit further up we have auriga
with the bright star cappella
that's called the goat star these little
three here are the kids
you can see in the graphic the herdsmen
herdsman auriga is carrying these
three goats in his arms
so i hope you've enjoyed that and we'll
bring the show to an end now and i'll
just let time run forward towards the
dawn
and we'll see you next month for the
[Music]
march
you